In 1968, Apollo 8
went to the moon.
They didn't land, but they
did circle the moon.
I was watching it on television,
and at a certain point one of
the astronauts casually said,
"We're going to turn the camera
around and show you the Earth."
And he did, and that was the
first time I had ever seen
the planet hanging in space
like that, and it was profound.
I think that for me, like
for many other people, it was
quite a shock. I don't think any
of us had any expectations
about how it would give us
such a different perspective.
I think the focus had been:
we're going to the stars,
we're going to the
other planets, and
suddenly we look
back at ourselves
and it seems to imply a new
kind of self-awareness.
One of the astronauts said,
"When we originally went
to the moon, our total focus
was on the moon,
we weren't thinking about
looking back at the Earth.
But now that we've done it,
that may well have been the
most important reason we went."
Oh golly, I remember going
through launch,
which is an overwhelming
experience.
The engines cut off, I felt
myself floating out of the seat,
I floated over to the window,
looked out,
and we were coming up over the
coast of Africa.
And that's when it hit me,
I'm in space.
And I just got incredibly
excited because it's something
I had dreamed about since
I was six years old.
I think you start out with this
idea of what it's going to
be like. And then when you
do finally look at the Earth
for the first time, you're
overwhelmed by how much more
beautiful it really is
when you see it for real.
It's just this dynamic, alive
place that you see glowing
all the time.
It was truly incredible
to be up there,
doing what I've always wanted
to do my whole life.
And then to glance back at our
planet, and see that view,
was just tremendous.
I can only describe what I've
seen. Looking down at
the Earth you see that line that
separates day into night
slowly moving across the
planet. Thunderstorms
on the horizon casting these
long shadows as the sun sets.
And then watching the
Earth come alive
and you see the lights from the
cities and the towns.
The events you see from space,
like flying over thunderstorms,
looking at them
from the top,
were spectacular, like a
firework show going on
and you're looking at it
from the very top.
Shooting stars going below us,
or dancing curtains of auroras,
it's just very hard
to describe
all the colors,
the beauty, the motion.
My job as Lunar Module pilot
was to be responsible for the
Lunar Module itself,
and responsible for the
science on the moon.
So when we started home,
I had a little more time to
look out the window than the
other guys, because most of my
responsibilities were completed.
We were in a particular mode
called the ‘barbecue mode',
so we were flying like this,
and rotating like that.
What that caused to happen
was every two minutes
a picture of the Earth,
the Moon, the Sun,
and a 360 degree panorama
of the heavens
appeared in the
spacecraft window.
I had studied astronomy, and
I had studied cosmology,
and fully understood that the
molecules in my body, and
the molecules in my partners'
bodies, and in the spacecraft
had been prototyped in some
ancient generation of stars.
In other words, it was pretty
obvious from those descriptions
that we're stardust.
Well that was pretty
awesome, and powerful.
Particularly since I had a
little more time at this point
to be reflective, and
to think about it.
Awe is one of those words I
think you have a better
understanding of
once you see it too.
I felt like using the word
awesome was totally appropriate
when it came to describing
what the planet looks like.
To have that experience of awe
is, at least for the moment,
to let go of yourself, to
transcend the sense of
separation. So it's not just
that they were experiencing
something other than them,
but that they were
at some very deep level
integrating, realizing their
interconnectedness with
that beautiful blue-green ball.
And this is why the astronauts,
particularly in the
International Space Station,
often say that much of their
free time is filled with what
they call ‘Earth gazing'--
just staring out at the Earth.
They can stare for hours,
because the changing scenery,
the interactivity of the
biosphere, all of this, has an
incredible aesthetic impact.
The beauty of seeing Earth as a
planet, as opposed to
being down here among it,
is a wonderful experience,
to then start to get into what
we call the Big Picture Effect,
or the Overview Effect.
I was flying cross-country,
from the East coast to the
West coast in the 1970s, and I
was looking out the window.
And as I was looking down at
the planet, the thought came
to me: anyone living
in a space settlement,
or living on the moon, would
always have an overview.
They would see things that we
know, but we don't experience,
which is that the Earth
is one system,
and we're all part
of that system.
And that there is a certain
unity and coherence to it all.
And I immediately called it
the "Overview Effect."
You do, from that perspective,
see the Earth as a planet.
You see the sun as a star.
We see the sun in a blue sky,
but up there you see the sun in
a black sky. So you are seeing
it from a cosmic perspective.
We've been evolving from the
beginning of civilization to a
larger and larger perspective
of life on the Earth.
But the next natural evolution
is understanding the life in
space. That is the fact that
the Earth, as Buckminster Fuller
used to famously say, is
a spaceship: Spaceship Earth.
We are in space already, it's
just that we haven't brought
that into our perspective
as we live here on Earth.
The Overview Effect is simply
the sudden recognition that we
live on a planet, and all the
implications that brings
to life on Earth. When we
look down at the Earth
from space we see this amazing,
indescribably beautiful planet.
It looks like a living,
breathing organism.
But it also, at the same time,
looks extremely fragile.
Because you go outside
on a clear day, and
it's the 'big blue sky ...it's
like it goes on forever.
How could we possibly put
enough stuff into it
to fill it up with things
that really change it?
And yet, you see it from space,
and it's this thin line
which is just barely hugging
the surface of the planet.
Anybody else who's ever gone
into space says the same thing.
Because it really is striking,
and it's really sobering to see
this paper-thin layer, and
to realize that that little
paper-thin layer is all that
protects every living thing
on Earth from death, from the
harshness of space.
There's this very poetic concept
that a lot of people express:
that there are no
boundaries from space.
And I've heard a lot of my
astronaut colleagues say that.
Unfortunately, it's not true,
you do see boundaries.
They're mostly the
result of human impact,
you can see erosion and
clear-cutting of forests.
It's a long litany of
environmental impact that
we've had on our planet. That's
something which, when you
see it from the cosmic
perspective, makes you
really appreciate the
concept of Spaceship Earth,
and that we're
all here together.
After I came back, and tried
to understand what this
experience was all about,
I could find nothing
in the science literature
about it, and nothing in the
religious literature that I
looked at. So I turned
to the local university and
asked them to help me
with what I saw. When
they came back to me
a few weeks later, they said,
"Well, in the ancient literature
we found a description called
‘savikalpa samadhi'.
That means that you see things
as you see them with your eyes,
but you experience them
emotionally and viscerally,
as with ecstasy, and a sense of
total unity and oneness.
And I said, well that's exactly
what the experience was.
And so it was rather clear to
me, as I studied this,
that it wasn't anything
new, but was something
very important to the way we
humans were put together.
Many of the great wisdom
traditions of the Earth
have pointed to what we're
calling the "Overview Effect."
That is to say they have
realized this unity,
this oneness, of all life on
Earth, and of consciousness
and awareness.
Within the Western tradition,
I think it's quite new, and
quite shocking
because there's been much more
of a sense of separation.
But if you look at other
non-Western cultures,
especially in Asia, the emphasis
on those has always been on
realization that the self and
the world are not separate
from each other, that
they're really interconnected:
that the individual self,
and the species as a whole,
is a manifestation
of the larger whole.
As you go into your mind
in a contemplative way,
the sense of the living reality
of the planet becomes obvious.
You become more in tune
with the natural world.
This is very akin to the direct
perception that the astronauts
have, so it's no wonder that
many people have likened
the Overview Effect to a
spiritual or meditative
experience, although
it's not exactly that.
It's a cognitive shift, that
very often can produce
a kind of meditative experience.
I'm sure we all interpret
it somewhat differently.
I know some of the fellows
go right to a religious
explanation. I didn't, I went to
more of a science explanation.
I think all that's wonderful--
that's what it takes to
build a civilization.
This view of the Earth from
space-- the whole Earth
perspective, I think is
the true symbol of this age.
And I believe what's going to
happen is there's going to be
a greater and greater interest
in communicating this idea.
Because, after all, it's
key to our survival--
we have to start acting as one
species with one destiny,
we are not going to survive
if we don't do that.
We're seeing very clearly that
if the Earth becomes sick,
then we become sick.
If the Earth dies,
then we're going to die.
People sense that something's
wrong, but they're
still struggling to go back
and find out what the real
roots of the problem are.
And I think what we need to
come to is a realization that
it's not just fixing an
economical or political system,
it's a basic worldview,
a basic understanding of who
we are that's at stake.
And a part of that is to
come up with a new story,
a new picture, a new way
to approach this,
and to shift our behaviors
in such a way
that it leads to a sustainable
approach to our civilization
as opposed to a destructive
approach.
It is a fragile planet, and if
we don't take care of it,
and we don't work together,
then we are going to have
bigger issues than we
have now down the road.
On a grand scale, we're
basically all living in
this one ecosystem called
Earth. And everything you
do on one side of the
ecosystem affects
the other side, and that
is a new way for living
for most of humanity.
We humans are
responsible for ourselves,
and if we are endangering our
future then we've got to learn
how to do it differently,
and to go forward into a
sustainable period.
Right now that seems very
difficult-- very difficult to
see how it's going to be,
but we've go to work on it.
When I was above the space
station, looking down at
the space station, looking down
against the Earth, and seeing
this amazing accomplishment,
I was thinking ‘wow'.
There were fifteen nations
that worked together
to build this amazing orbital
complex in space.
If we can take
these fifteen nations,
and do this amazing
accomplishment,
imagine what we can do
by working together,
by setting aside our
differences for a common goal,
to overcome some of the
challenges facing our planet.
We have this connection to
Earth-- I mean, it's our home.
I don't know how you can come
back and not in some way
be changed. It may be subtle,
you see differences in
different people in just
the general response
when they come back from space.
But I think collectively
everybody has that
emblazoned on their memories
the way the planet looks.
You know, you can't
take that lightly.
You realize you've been blessed
by the opportunity to see that.
It really does look like
this beautiful oasis
out in the middle of
nothingness.
And if you have a chance
for your eyes to adjust,
and you can actually see the
stars and the Milky Way,
it's this oasis against
the backdrop of infinity,
this enormous
universe behind it.
It's really a very moving
experience to be able to see
that with your eyes.
You look back at it,
and it's placed perfectly from
the sun to take care of us,
and you kind of take that
reverse role on about,
well, we need to be
taking care of it too,
so it can continue to
do that for us.
I don't know how you can't have
a greater appreciation for it
after you see it that way.